learn: add learning resources (#41)
botlabs-gg/yagpdb-docs-v2: content/learn/beginner/control-flow-1.md

code if the condition is true. If the condition is false, the block of code is skipped.

```go
{{ if eq 5 5 }}
  Five is equal to five!
{{ end }}
```

We use the `eq` comparison function to check whether its given arguments are equal; we will enumerate all comparison
functions in a [later section](#comparison-actions) on this page.

We can expand this to execute a different block of code if the condition is false by using an `else` block:

```go
{{ if eq 5 3 }}
  Five is equal to three!
{{ else }}
  Five is not equal to three!
{{ end }}
```

This can be further expanded to check multiple conditions using `else if`, which are checked sequentially until one of
them is true:

```go
{{ if eq 5 3 }}
  Five is equal to three!
{{ else if eq 5 5 }}
  Five is equal to five!
{{ else }}
  Five is not equal to three or five!
{{ end }}
```

#### Guard Clauses

As your code grows, you may find yourself nesting `if` statements inside each other. This can lead to code that is hard
to read and understand. One way to avoid this is to use _guard clauses_. A guard clause is an `if` statement that checks

> for a condition and returns early via the `{{ return }}` action if the condition is false.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for a condition and returns early via the `{{ return }}` action. Logically this means we need to invert the condition we would have checked with an `if`/`else` statement.
```
We are still checking if a condition is true.

  {{ $isCool = true }}
{{ end }}

Are you cool? {{ $isCool }}
```

It is considered good practice to define variables in the smallest scope possible. This makes your code easier to read
and understand, as you do not have to search through the entire codebase to find where a variable was defined.

{{< callout context="caution" title="Definition and Reassignment" icon="outline/alert-triangle" >}}

In custom commands, you use `:=` to define a variable, and `=` to reassign a variable. The bot will not throw an error
if you try to re-define a variable using `:=`, but it will not affect the outer scoped variable.

{{< /callout >}}

<div style="float: right; margin-left: 7px;">

![Responses: template: :XX: unexpected EOF](unexpected-eof.png)

</div>

Try and recall the last example from the introduction of if-statements and notice how, despite us having multiple blocks
of branching code, there's still only one `{{ end }}` action.

Each control structure's start (`if`, `with`, etc.) must eventually have such a closing statement. Not doing so will
result in an error similar to `template: :XX: unexpected EOF`, where `:XX:` is the line number where the error

> occurred---an example shown above.

Author: If we're moving the image below this block of text in the raw markdown, it will flow into the next section.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a159da28-9416-42ec-a516-e7a1dc621a05)

Having it in the centre and below the text doesn't feel nice to me, as it is relatively small—in the rendered page it is above and to the right of this sentence.

> occurred---an example shown above.

Reviewer: How about beside the paragraph that references it, rather than the first paragraph? It feels slightly out of place there to me.
![2024-07-22T122832](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d27c7734-fc2e-404c-bb48-21ce5ff4697d)

+++
title = "Control Flow 1"
weight = 230
+++

Until now, we have just written some linear code that executes from top to bottom. However, in real-world applications,

> we often need to make decisions based on certain conditions. This is where *control flow* comes in.

Author: I have rewritten this to read as follows:
> we often need to execute different code depending on certain states of our program.

Let me know if it now reads better.

You already have an intuitive understanding of control flow. For instance, when you cross the street, you look left and
right to see if any cars are coming. If there are no cars, you cross the street. If there are cars, you wait until they
have passed, then check again. This is a simple example of a decision-making process.

## Comparison Actions

> In programming, we can make decisions by comparing values to each other. We can compare numbers, strings, and other data

Reviewer 2: might be worth mentioning for programmers with prior experience that comparison is done via functions, not binary operators

types. The result of a comparison is a *boolean* value, which is either `true` or `false`.

{{< callout context="caution" title="Comparing across Types" icon="outline/alert-triangle" >}}

Just like you cannot quite compare apples and oranges, you cannot compare values of different types. For instance, you
cannot compare a number to a string. The bot will throw an error if you try to do so, you will have to convert either of
them to the other type first.

{{< /callout >}}

We provide the following comparison functions in Custom Commands:

- `eq` (equals `==`)
- `ne` (not equals `!=`)
- `lt` (less than `<`)
- `le` (less than or equal to `<=`)
- `gt` (greater than `>`)
- `ge` (greater than or equal to `>=`)

These functions can only compare basic data types as introduced in [Data Types 1](/learn/beginner/datatypes-1). Strings

> are compared using the [underlying Unicode values](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Unicode_characters), stepping

Reviewer 2: byte-by-byte contradicts "[comparison] using underlying Unicode values". The comparison is done via (an equivalent process to) memcmp so byte-by-byte is accurate.

Author: To be fair I copied that more or less verbatim from the old files; I was
confused by that as well. I'll take your word for it and *maybe* check
again for myself, just to be sure.

through the strings byte by byte. Please refer to the [functions documentation](/docs/reference/templates/functions)
for the syntax of these functions.

> ### If Statements

Reviewer 2: I would rather put this section first, noting that `eq` is a comparison function that checks whether its arguments are equal and that the full list of comparison functions will be enumerated later.

The most basic form of control flow is the `if` statement. An `if` statement checks a condition and executes a block of
code if the condition is true. If the condition is false, the block of code is skipped.

Here is an example of an `if` statement:

```go
{{ if eq 5 5 }}
  Five is equal to five!
{{ end }}
```

We can expand this to execute a different block of code if the condition is false by using an `else` block:

```go
{{ if eq 5 3 }}
  Five is equal to three!
{{ else }}
  Five is not equal to three!
{{ end }}
```

This can be further expanded to check multiple conditions using `else if`, which are checked sequentially until one of
them is true:

```go
{{ if eq 5 3 }}
  Five is equal to three!
{{ else if eq 5 5 }}
  Five is equal to five!
{{ else }}
  Five is not equal to three or five!
{{ end }}
```

#### Guard Clauses

As your code grows, you may find yourself nesting `if` statements inside each other. This can lead to code that is hard
to read and understand. One way to avoid this is to use *guard clauses*. A guard clause is an `if` statement that checks

> for a condition and returns early if the condition is false.

Reviewer 2: We have not introduced `return` yet (I think?), so although the concept is simple it would still be nice to briefly elaborate: "and exits early using the `{{ return }}` action if the condition is false."

Author: You're quite right, we haven't introduced `return` yet. I think it's
sufficient enough to explain that we use `return` to exit early.
Later on, when we introduce `define` and friends, we can then expand the
definition of return and show how it's used to return a value from a
template.

coolness value, which should be true if the user's name is "alice". We can achieve this by defining a variable in
the outer scope and re-assigning, using the `=` operator, its value in the inner scope:

```go
{{ $isCool := false }}

{{ if eq .User.Username "alice" }}
  {{ $isCool = true }}
{{ end }}

Are you cool? {{ $isCool }}
```

It is considered good practice to define variables in the smallest scope possible. This makes your code easier to read
and understand, as you do not have to search through the entire codebase to find where a variable was defined.

{{< callout context="caution" title="Definition and Reassignment" icon="outline/alert-triangle" >}}

In Custom Commands, you use `:=` to define a variable, and `=` to reassign a variable. The bot will not throw an error
if you try to re-define a variable using `:=`, but it will not affect the outer scoped variable.

{{< /callout >}}

## Boolean Logic

To form more complex conditional checks, we need to understand *boolean logic*. [Boolean logic] is a branch of algebra
that deals with true/false values. In programming, we use boolean logic to make decisions based on the truth value of

> expressions. There are three primary boolean operators: `AND`, `OR`, and `NOT`.

Reviewer 2: Mentioning boolean algebra is misplaced in an introductory document. All the operators have natural explanations: e.g., OR reports whether at least one expression is true: I will be late to school if `(i wake up late) or (the bus is late)`.

Author: It was there at the start of the old learn resources 😎. I do agree
though, it's a bit of a jump to go from simple comparisons to full on
boolean algebra. Do we want to place that in a reference document?

[boolean logic]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_algebra

### Logical NOT

The logical `NOT` operator is the simplest of these three. It takes one argument and gives back the exact opposite of
whatever you give it. We provide this operator in the form of the `not` function in Custom Commands.

Expressed in a *truth table*, the `NOT` operator looks like this:

| A     | NOT A |
|-------|-------|
| false | true  |

> | true  | false |

Reviewer 2: Drop the truth tables as well, IMO.

{{< /callout >}}

<div style="float: right; margin-left: 7px;">

![Responses: template: :XX: unexpected EOF](unexpected-eof.png)

</div>

Try and recall the last example from the introduction of if-statements and notice how, despite us having multiple blocks

> of branching code, there's still only one `{{ end }}` action.

Reviewer 2: I'm not too sure how this sentence is relevant; could you clarify?

Author: ```
if {
    // code
} else {
    // other code
}
```
Note the additional `{}` for the else block; if we're going to say "yeah this is like the closing curly brace", this "but actually only once" seems relevant to me. Not too sure how to phrase this better, or if it's just better to outright remove it.
But then, I do have seen code like this (please do not ask me when / where):

```
{{ if pipeline }}
    code
{{ end }}
{{ else }}
    more code
{{ end }}
```

Each control structure's start (`if`, `with`, etc.) must eventually have such a closing statement. Not doing so will
result in an error similar to `template: :XX: unexpected EOF`, where `:XX:` is the line number where the error

> occurred---an example shown above.

Reviewer 2: Each control structure (`if`, `with`, etc.) must be closed by an `{{end}}` action. If you forget to do so, the custom command engine will not know where your control structure terminates and hence issues the `template: :XX: unexpected EOF` error.

If you're familiar with C-style programming languages, this concept will most likely strike you as the curly braces

> these languages use to denote code blocks.

Reviewer 2: If you are familiar with C-family programming languages, this error is analogous to missing the closing `}` of a block of code.
